---
title: "Quickstart: Locally hosted with Docker"
sidebar_label: Local Quickstart (self-hosted)
image: og/docs/quickstart-tutorial.jpg
# tags: ['getting started']
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import SkipLink from "/src/components/SkipValidationLink";
import CardsSection from "/src/components/CardsSection";
import Tooltip from "/src/components/Tooltip";
import styles from "/src/components/CardsSection/styles.module.scss";

export const quickstartOptions = [
  {
    title: (
      <>
        Vectorize objects during import
        <br />
        (recommended)
      </>
    ),
    description:
      "Import objects and vectorize them with the Ollama embedding model.",
    link: "?import=vectorization#create-a-collection",
    icon: "fas fa-arrows-spin",
    groupId: "import",
    activeTab: "vectorization",
  },
  {
    title: "Import vectors",
    description: "Import pre-computed vector embeddings along with your data.",
    link: "?import=custom-embeddings#create-a-collection",
    icon: "fas fa-circle-nodes",
    groupId: "import",
    activeTab: "custom-embeddings",
  },
];

Weaviate is an open-source vector database built to power AI applications. This quickstart guide will show you how to:

1. **Set up a collection** - Create a collection and import data into it. 
2. **Search** - Perform a similarity (vector) search on your data.
3. **RAG** - Perform Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) with a generative model.

import KapaAI from "/src/components/KapaAI";

If you encounter any issues along the way or have additional questions, use the <KapaAI>Ask AI</KapaAI> feature.

## Prerequisites

Before we get started, install [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-started/get-docker/) on your machine.
We will be running Weaviate and Ollama language models locally. We recommend that you use a modern computer with at least 8GB of RAM, preferably 16GB or more.

import TelemetryNotice from '/_includes/telemetry-notice.mdx';

<TelemetryNotice/>

---

## Start Weaviate and Ollama with Docker Compose

Save the following code to a file named `docker-compose.yml` in your project directory.

```yaml
services:
  weaviate:
    command:
    - --host
    - 0.0.0.0
    - --port
    - '8080'
    - --scheme
    - http
    image: cr.weaviate.io/semitechnologies/weaviate:||site.weaviate_version||
    ports:
    - 8080:8080
    - 50051:50051
    volumes:
    - weaviate_data:/var/lib/weaviate
    restart: on-failure:0
    environment:
      AUTHENTICATION_ANONYMOUS_ACCESS_ENABLED: 'true'
      PERSISTENCE_DATA_PATH: '/var/lib/weaviate'
      ENABLE_MODULES: 'text2vec-ollama,generative-ollama'
      CLUSTER_HOSTNAME: 'node1'
      OLLAMA_API_ENDPOINT: 'http://ollama:11434'
    depends_on:
      - ollama

  ollama:
    image: ollama/ollama:0.12.9
    ports:
      - "11434:11434"
    volumes:
      - ollama_data:/root/.ollama

volumes:
  weaviate_data:
  ollama_data:
```

Run the following command to start a Weaviate instance and the Ollama server inside Docker containers:

```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

Once the Ollama service starts, you can pull the required embedding model ([`nomic-embed-text`](https://ollama.com/library/nomic-embed-text)) and generative model ([`llama3.2`](https://ollama.com/library/llama3.2)) in the `ollama` container:

```bash
docker compose exec ollama ollama pull nomic-embed-text
docker compose exec ollama ollama pull llama3.2
```

---

## Install a client library

Follow the instructions below to install one of the official client libraries, available in [Python](../client-libraries/python/index.mdx), [JavaScript/TypeScript](../client-libraries/typescript/index.mdx), [Go](../client-libraries/go.md), and [Java](../client-libraries/java/index.mdx).

import CodeClientInstall from "/_includes/code/quickstart/clients.install.new.mdx";

<CodeClientInstall />

## Step 1: Create a collection & import data {#create-a-collection}

There are two paths you can choose from when importing data:

<CardsSection items={quickstartOptions} className={styles.smallCards} />
<br />

<Tabs groupId="import" queryString="import" className="hidden-tabs">
<TabItem value="vectorization" label="Vectorize objects during import">

The following example creates a collection called `Movie` with the [Ollama](../model-providers/ollama/embeddings.md) embedding model provider (`text2vec-ollama`) for vectorizing data during import and for querying. You are also free to use any other available [embedding model provider](../model-providers/index.md).

import CreateCollection from "/_includes/code/quickstart/quickstart.short.local.create_collection.mdx";

<CreateCollection />

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="custom-embeddings" label="Import vectors">

The following example creates a collection called `Movie`. The data should already contain the <Tooltip content="Vector embeddings generated by an embedding model (from a provider like OpenAI, Anthropic, etc.)." position="top"><span style={{ textDecoration: "underline", cursor: "help" }}>pre-computed vector embeddings</span></Tooltip>. This option is useful for when you are migrating data from a different vector database.

import CreateCollectionCustomVectors from "/_includes/code/quickstart/quickstart.short.local.import_vectors.create_collection.mdx";

<CreateCollectionCustomVectors />

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Step 2: Semantic (vector) search {#semantic-search}

<Tabs groupId="import" queryString="import" className="hidden-tabs">
<TabItem value="vectorization" label="Vectorize objects during import">

Semantic search finds results based on meaning. This is called `nearText` in Weaviate. The following example searches for 2 objects (_limit_) whose meaning is most similar to that of `sci-fi`.

import QueryNearText from "/_includes/code/quickstart/quickstart.short.local.query.neartext.mdx";

<QueryNearText />

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="custom-embeddings" label="Import vectors">

Semantic search finds results based on meaning. This is called `nearVector` in Weaviate. The following example searches for 2 objects (_limit_) whose vector is most similar to the query vector.

import QueryNearVectorImportVectors from "/_includes/code/quickstart/quickstart.short.local.import_vectors.query.nearvector.mdx";

<QueryNearVectorImportVectors />

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

<details>

<summary>Example response</summary>

```json
{
  "genre": "Science Fiction",
  "title": "The Matrix",
  "description": "A computer hacker learns about the true nature of reality and his role in the war against its controllers."
}
{
  "genre": "Fantasy",
  "title": "The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring",
  "description": "A meek Hobbit and his companions set out on a perilous journey to destroy a powerful ring and save Middle-earth."
}
```

</details>

:::tip Weaviate Agents

Try the [Query Agent](/agents/query/index.md) with a Weaviate Cloud instance. You simply provide a prompt/question in natural language, and the Query Agent takes care of all the needed steps to provide an answer.

:::

## Step 3: Retrieval augmented generation (RAG)

<Tabs groupId="import" queryString="import" className="hidden-tabs">
<TabItem value="vectorization" label="Vectorize objects during import">

Retrieval augmented generation (RAG), also called generative search, works by prompting a large language model (LLM) with a combination of a _user query_ and _data retrieved from a database_.

The following example combines the semantic search for the query `sci-fi` with a prompt to generate a tweet using the Ollama generative model (`generative-ollama`).

import QueryRAG from "/_includes/code/quickstart/quickstart.short.local.query.rag.mdx";

<QueryRAG />

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="custom-embeddings" label="Import vectors">

Retrieval augmented generation (RAG), also called generative search, works by prompting a large language model (LLM) with a combination of a _user query_ and _data retrieved from a database_.

The following example combines the vector similarity search with a prompt to generate a tweet using the Ollama generative model (`generative-ollama`).

import QueryRAGCustomVectors from "/_includes/code/quickstart/quickstart.short.local.import-vectors.query.rag.mdx";

<QueryRAGCustomVectors />

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

<details>

<summary>Example response</summary>

```json
🕶️ Unplug from the system & join Neo's journey 💊🐰

"The Matrix" will blow your mind 🤯 as reality unravels 🌀

Kung-fu, slow-mo & mind-bending sci-fi 🥋🕴️

Are you ready to see how deep the rabbit hole goes? 🔴🔵 #TheMatrix #WakeUp
```

</details>

## Next steps

import NextSteps from "/_includes/quickstart.short.nextsteps.mdx";

<NextSteps />

## Questions and feedback

import DocsFeedback from "/_includes/docs-feedback.mdx";

<DocsFeedback />
